docs: Add how to parse guide (#14947)
influxdata/telegraf: docs/PARSING_DATA.md

# Parsing Data

Telegraf has the ability to take data in a variety of formats. Telegraf requires
configuration from the user in order to correctly parse, store, and send the
original data. Telegraf does not take the raw data and maintain it internally.

> Telegraf uses [line protocol][] to store data. This means that data needs to be

Reviewer: Hmmm that's not completely true. Maybe
```suggestion
Telegraf uses an internal metric representation consisting of the metric name, tags, fields and a timestamp. This means that data needs to be
```

Author: I like your suggestion and I will accept it! However, at the same time, aren't those essentially the definition of line protocol? I like to mention line protocol since that tends to be a helpful way to show or have them related to how the data looks.

Reviewer: I agree to mention the line-protocol, maybe something like
```text
Telegraf uses an internal metric representation consisting of the metric name, tags, fields and a timestamp inspired by the [line protocol][].
```

broken up into a metric name, tags, fields, and a timestamp. While all of these
options are not required, they are available to the user and be necessary to
define to ensure the data is correctly represented.

[line protocol]: https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/cloud/reference/syntax/line-protocol/

## Parsers

The first step is to determine which parser to use. Look at the list of
[parsers][] and find one that will work with the user's data. This is generally
straightforward as the data-type will only have one parser that is actually
applicable to the data.

[parsers]: https://github.com/influxdata/telegraf/tree/master/plugins/parsers

### JSON parsers

There is an exception when it comes to JSON data. Instead of a single parser,
there are three different parsers capable of reading JSON data:

* `json`: This parser is great for flat JSON data. If your JSON is more complex
  and for example, has other objects or nested arrays, then do not use this and
  look at the other two options.
* `json_v2`: The v2 parser was created out of the need to parse JSON objects. It
  can take on more advanced cases, at the cost of additional configuration.

> * `xpath`: The xpath parser is the most capable of the three options. While the

Reviewer: Maybe `xpath_json` as this is what you need for JSON.

Author: Good catch

> * `xpath`: The xpath parser is the most capable of the three options. While the
>   xpath name may imply XML data, it can parse a variety of data types using
>   XPath expressions.

Author: ```suggestion
* `xpath_json`: The xpath parser is the most capable of the three options. While
  the xpath name may imply XML data, it can parse a variety of data types using
  XPath expressions.
```

## Tags and fields

The next step is to look at the data and determine how the data needs to be
split up between tags and fields. Tags are generally strings or values that a
user will want to search on. While fields are the raw data values, numeric
types, etc. Generally, data is considered to be a field unless otherwise
specified as a tag.

## Timestamp

> To parser a timestamp, at the very least the users needs to specify which field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To parse a timestamp, at the very least the users needs to specify which field
```

has the timestamp and what the format of the timestamp is. The format can either
by a predefined Unix timestamp or parsed using a custom format based on Go
reference time.

For Unix timestamps Telegraf understand the following settings:

| Timestamp             | Timestamp Format |
|-----------------------|------------------|
| `1709572232`          | `unix`    |
| `1709572232123`       | `unix_ms` |
| `1709572232123456`    | `unix_us` |
| `1709572232123456789` | `unix_ns` |

To use a custom timestamp, a user must provide the [Go reference time][]
notation. Here are a few example timestamps and their Go reference time
equivalent:

| Timestamp                     | Go reference time             |
|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| `2024-03-04T17:10:32`         | `2006-01-02T15:04:05` |
| `04 Mar 24 10:10 -0700`       | `02 Jan 06 15:04 -0700` |
| `2024-03-04T10:10:32Z07:00`   | `2006-01-02T15:04:05Z07:00` |
| `2024-03-04 17:10:32.123+00`  | `2006-01-02 15:04:05.999+00` |
| `2024-03-04T10:10:32.123456Z` | `2006-01-02T15:04:05.000000Z` |
| `2024-03-04T10:10:32.123456Z` | `2006-01-02T15:04:05.999999999Z` |

> 

Reviewer: I think we should also mention timezone handling! Especially if there is no timezone specified in the format (i,e. the time is assumed to be in UTC then if not explicitly given).

Please note: There are also some [named formats](https://github.com/influxdata/telegraf/blob/a6d550e494dcadb1d6d5cb7ff6ca587cbb0604c9/internal/internal.go#L367)...

Reviewer: I would maybe leave out the "timezone abbreviations" here, but not sure. I mean parsers are the only place where time-formatting is relevant, so maybe we should put it in here?

Note for fractional second values, the user can use either a `9` or `0`. Using a
`0` forces a certain length, but using `9`s do not.

[Go reference time]: https://pkg.go.dev/time#pkg-constants

## Examples

Below are a few basic examples to get users started.

### CSV

Given the following data:

```csv
node,temp,humidity,alarm,time
node1,32.3,23,false,2023-03-06T16:52:23Z
node2,22.6,44,false,2023-03-06T16:52:23Z
node3,17.9,56,true,2023-03-06T16:52:23Z
```

Here is corresponding parser configuration and result:

```toml
[[inputs.file]]
files = ["test.csv"]
data_format = "csv"

csv_header_row_count = 1

> csv_column_names = ["node","temp","humidity","alarm","time"]

Reviewer: Couldn't you leave this out in this case?

Author: I think so. I tried to consider what config options are most common and include those. Versus either listing all of them or only showing the bare minimum.

Reviewer: I'm fine with keeping it as-is.

csv_tag_columns = ["node"]
csv_timestamp_column = "time"
csv_timestamp_format = "2006-01-02T15:04:05Z"
```

> ```s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```text
```

file,node=node1 temp=32.3,humidity=23i,alarm=false 1678121543000000000
file,node=node2 temp=22.6,humidity=44i,alarm=false 1678121543000000000
file,node=node3 temp=17.9,humidity=56i,alarm=true 1678121543000000000
```

### JSON flat data

Given the following data:

```json
{ "node": "node", "temp": 32.3, "humidity": 23, "alarm": false, "time": "1709572232123456789"}
```

Here is corresponding parser configuration:

```toml
[[inputs.file]]
files = ["test.json"]
precision = "1ns"
data_format = "json"

tag_keys = ["node"]
json_time_key = "time"
json_time_format = "unix_ns"

```

> ```s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```text
```

file,node=node temp=32.3,humidity=23 1709572232123456789
```

### JSON Objects

Given the following data:

```json
{
    "metrics": [
        { "node": "node1", "temp": 32.3, "humidity": 23, "alarm": "false", "time": "1678121543"},
        { "node": "node2", "temp": 22.6, "humidity": 44, "alarm": "false", "time": "1678121543"},
        { "node": "node3", "temp": 17.9, "humidity": 56, "alarm": "true", "time": "1678121543"}
    ]
}
```

Here is corresponding parser configuration:

```toml
[[inputs.file]]
files = ["test.json"]
data_format = "json_v2"

[[inputs.file.json_v2]]
[[inputs.file.json_v2.object]]
  path = "metrics"
  timestamp_key = "time"
  timestamp_format = "unix"
  [[inputs.file.json_v2.object.tag]]
    path = "#.node"
  [[inputs.file.json_v2.object.field]]
    path = "#.temp"
    type = "float"
  [[inputs.file.json_v2.object.field]]
    path = "#.humidity"
    type = "int"
  [[inputs.file.json_v2.object.field]]
    path = "#.alarm"
    type = "bool"
```

> ```s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```text
```

file,node=node1 temp=32.3,humidity=23i,alarm=false 1678121543000000000
file,node=node2 temp=22.6,humidity=44i,alarm=false 1678121543000000000
file,node=node3 temp=17.9,humidity=56i,alarm=true 1678121543000000000
```

### JSON Line Protocol

Given the following data:

```json
{
  "fields": {"temp": 32.3, "humidity": 23, "alarm": false},
  "name": "measurement",
  "tags": {"node": "node1"},
  "time": "2024-03-04T10:10:32.123456Z"
}
```

Here is corresponding parser configuration:

```toml
[[inputs.file]]
files = ["test.json"]
precision = "1us"
data_format = "xpath_json"

[[inputs.file.xpath]]
  metric_name = "/name"
  field_selection = "fields/*"
  tag_selection = "tags/*"
  timestamp = "/time"
  timestamp_format = "2006-01-02T15:04:05.999999999Z"
```

> ```s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```text
```

# Parsing Data

Telegraf has the ability to take data in a variety of formats. Telegraf requires
configuration from the user in order to correctly parse, store, and send the
original data. Telegraf does not take the raw data and maintain it internally.

Telegraf uses an internal metric representation consisting of the metric name,

> tags, fields and a timestamp. This is very similar to [line protocol][]. This

Reviewer: To avoid a double "This":
```suggestion
tags, fields and a timestamp, very similar to [line protocol][]. This
```

means that data needs to be broken up into a metric name, tags, fields, and a

> timestamp. While all of these options are not required, they are available to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
timestamp. While none of these options are required, they are available to
```

> the user and be necessary to define to ensure the data is correctly represented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the user and might be necessary to ensure the data is represented correctly.
```

There is an exception when it comes to JSON data. Instead of a single parser,
there are three different parsers capable of reading JSON data:

* `json`: This parser is great for flat JSON data. If the JSON is more complex
  and for example, has other objects or nested arrays, then do not use this and
  look at the other two options.
* `json_v2`: The v2 parser was created out of the need to parse JSON objects. It
  can take on more advanced cases, at the cost of additional configuration.
* `xpath_json`: The xpath parser is the most capable of the three options. While
  the xpath name may imply XML data, it can parse a variety of data types using
  XPath expressions.

## Tags and fields

The next step is to look at the data and determine how the data needs to be
split up between tags and fields. Tags are generally strings or values that a
user will want to search on. While fields are the raw data values, numeric
types, etc. Generally, data is considered to be a field unless otherwise
specified as a tag.

## Timestamp

To parse a timestamp, at the very least the users needs to specify which field
has the timestamp and what the format of the timestamp is. The format can either

> by a predefined Unix timestamp or parsed using a custom format based on Go

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be a predefined Unix timestamp or parsed using a custom format based on Go
```

reference time.

> For Unix timestamps Telegraf understand the following settings:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Unix timestamps Telegraf understands the following settings:
```
